README.md, before:

# CSM

**2025/03/13** - We are releasing the 1B CSM variant. The checkpoint is [hosted on Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/sesame/csm_1b).

---

CSM (Conversational Speech Model) is a speech generation model from [Sesame](https://www.sesame.com) that generates RVQ audio codes from text and audio inputs. The model architecture employs a [Llama](https://www.llama.com/) backbone and a smaller audio decoder that produces [Mimi](https://huggingface.co/kyutai/mimi) audio codes.

A fine-tuned variant of CSM powers the [interactive voice demo](https://www.sesame.com/voicedemo) shown in our [blog post](https://www.sesame.com/research/crossing_the_uncanny_valley_of_voice).

A hosted [Hugging Face space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sesame/csm-1b) is also available for testing audio generation.

## Requirements

* A CUDA-compatible GPU
* The code has been tested on CUDA 12.4 and 12.6, but it may also work on other versions
* Similarly, Python 3.10 is recommended, but newer versions may be fine
* For some audio operations, `ffmpeg` may be required
* Access to the following Hugging Face models:
  * [Llama-3.2-1B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B)
  * [CSM-1B](https://huggingface.co/sesame/csm-1b)

### Setup

```bash
git clone git@github.com:SesameAILabs/csm.git
cd csm
python3.10 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Windows Setup

The `triton` package cannot be installed in Windows. Instead use `pip install triton-windows`.

## Usage

Generate a sentence

```python
from huggingface_hub import hf_hub_download
from generator import load_csm_1b
import torchaudio
import torch

if torch.backends.mps.is_available():
    device = "mps"
elif torch.cuda.is_available():
    device = "cuda"
else:
    device = "cpu"
model_path = hf_hub_download(repo_id="sesame/csm-1b", filename="ckpt.pt")
generator = load_csm_1b(model_path, device)
audio = generator.generate(
    text="Hello from Sesame.",
    speaker=0,
    context=[],
    max_audio_length_ms=10_000,
)

torchaudio.save("audio.wav", audio.unsqueeze(0).cpu(), generator.sample_rate)
```

CSM sounds best when provided with context. You can prompt or provide context to the model using a `Segment` for each speaker's utterance.

```python
speakers = [0, 1, 0, 0]
transcripts = [
    "Hey how are you doing.",
    "Pretty good, pretty good.",
    "I'm great.",
    "So happy to be speaking to you.",
]
audio_paths = [
    "utterance_0.wav",
    "utterance_1.wav",
    "utterance_2.wav",
    "utterance_3.wav",
]

def load_audio(audio_path):
    audio_tensor, sample_rate = torchaudio.load(audio_path)
    audio_tensor = torchaudio.functional.resample(
        audio_tensor.squeeze(0), orig_freq=sample_rate, new_freq=generator.sample_rate
    )
    return audio_tensor

segments = [
    Segment(text=transcript, speaker=speaker, audio=load_audio(audio_path))
    for transcript, speaker, audio_path in zip(transcripts, speakers, audio_paths)
]
audio = generator.generate(
    text="Me too, this is some cool stuff huh?",
    speaker=1,
    context=segments,
    max_audio_length_ms=10_000,
)

torchaudio.save("audio.wav", audio.unsqueeze(0).cpu(), generator.sample_rate)
```

## FAQ

**Does this model come with any voices?**

The model open-sourced here is a base generation model. It is capable of producing a variety of voices, but it has not been fine-tuned on any specific voice.

**Can I converse with the model?**

CSM is trained to be an audio generation model and not a general-purpose multimodal LLM. It cannot generate text. We suggest using a separate LLM for text generation.

**Does it support other languages?**

The model has some capacity for non-English languages due to data contamination in the training data, but it likely won't do well.

## Misuse and abuse ⚠️

This project provides a high-quality speech generation model for research and educational purposes. While we encourage responsible and ethical use, we **explicitly prohibit** the following:

- **Impersonation or Fraud**: Do not use this model to generate speech that mimics real individuals without their explicit consent.
- **Misinformation or Deception**: Do not use this model to create deceptive or misleading content, such as fake news or fraudulent calls.
- **Illegal or Harmful Activities**: Do not use this model for any illegal, harmful, or malicious purposes.

By using this model, you agree to comply with all applicable laws and ethical guidelines. We are **not responsible** for any misuse, and we strongly condemn unethical applications of this technology.

---

## Authors
Johan Schalkwyk, Ankit Kumar, Dan Lyth, Sefik Emre Eskimez, Zack Hodari, Cinjon Resnick, Ramon Sanabria, Raven Jiang, and the Sesame team.

Commit message:

Update README.md to add Segment import and to generate the audio files for the second example
This pr imports Segment and also generates the audio files for the transcriptions. Otherwise, the example might be confusing for many people. Moreover, code for playing the audio files on a Jupyter notebook has also been added.

README.md, after:

# CSM

**2025/03/13** - We are releasing the 1B CSM variant. The checkpoint is [hosted on Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/sesame/csm_1b).

---

CSM (Conversational Speech Model) is a speech generation model from [Sesame](https://www.sesame.com) that generates RVQ audio codes from text and audio inputs. The model architecture employs a [Llama](https://www.llama.com/) backbone and a smaller audio decoder that produces [Mimi](https://huggingface.co/kyutai/mimi) audio codes.

A fine-tuned variant of CSM powers the [interactive voice demo](https://www.sesame.com/voicedemo) shown in our [blog post](https://www.sesame.com/research/crossing_the_uncanny_valley_of_voice).

A hosted [Hugging Face space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sesame/csm-1b) is also available for testing audio generation.

## Requirements

* A CUDA-compatible GPU
* The code has been tested on CUDA 12.4 and 12.6, but it may also work on other versions
* Similarly, Python 3.10 is recommended, but newer versions may be fine
* For some audio operations, `ffmpeg` may be required
* Access to the following Hugging Face models:
  * [Llama-3.2-1B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B)
  * [CSM-1B](https://huggingface.co/sesame/csm-1b)

### Setup

```bash
git clone git@github.com:SesameAILabs/csm.git
cd csm
python3.10 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Windows Setup

The `triton` package cannot be installed in Windows. Instead use `pip install triton-windows`.

## Usage

Generate a sentence

```python
from huggingface_hub import hf_hub_download
from generator import load_csm_1b
import torchaudio
import torch

if torch.backends.mps.is_available():
    device = "mps"
elif torch.cuda.is_available():
    device = "cuda"
else:
    device = "cpu"
model_path = hf_hub_download(repo_id="sesame/csm-1b", filename="ckpt.pt")
generator = load_csm_1b(model_path, device)
audio = generator.generate(
    text="Hello from Sesame.",
    speaker=0,
    context=[],
    max_audio_length_ms=10_000,
)

torchaudio.save("audio.wav", audio.unsqueeze(0).cpu(), generator.sample_rate)
```

If you want to play the audio on a Jupyter Notebook

```python
from IPython.display import Audio
Audio('audio.wav', autoplay=True)
```

CSM sounds best when provided with context. You can prompt or provide context to the model using a `Segment` for each speaker's utterance.

```python
from generator import Segment

speakers = [0, 1, 0, 0]
transcripts = [
    "Hey how are you doing.",
    "Pretty good, pretty good.",
    "I'm great.",
    "So happy to be speaking to you.",
]
audio_paths = [
    "utterance_0.wav",
    "utterance_1.wav",
    "utterance_2.wav",
    "utterance_3.wav",
]

# The code below is for creating the audio files from the transcripts if you don't have the files already
for transcript, speaker, audio_path in zip(transcripts, speakers, audio_paths):
  audio = generator.generate(
      text=transcript,
      speaker=speaker,
      context=[],
      max_audio_length_ms=10_000,
  )
  torchaudio.save(audio_path, audio.unsqueeze(0).cpu(), generator.sample_rate)


def load_audio(audio_path):
    audio_tensor, sample_rate = torchaudio.load(audio_path)
    audio_tensor = torchaudio.functional.resample(
        audio_tensor.squeeze(0), orig_freq=sample_rate, new_freq=generator.sample_rate
    )
    return audio_tensor

segments = [
    Segment(text=transcript, speaker=speaker, audio=load_audio(audio_path))
    for transcript, speaker, audio_path in zip(transcripts, speakers, audio_paths)
]
audio = generator.generate(
    text="Me too, this is some cool stuff huh?",
    speaker=1,
    context=segments,
    max_audio_length_ms=10_000,
)

torchaudio.save("audio.wav", audio.unsqueeze(0).cpu(), generator.sample_rate)
```

## FAQ

**Does this model come with any voices?**

The model open-sourced here is a base generation model. It is capable of producing a variety of voices, but it has not been fine-tuned on any specific voice.

**Can I converse with the model?**

CSM is trained to be an audio generation model and not a general-purpose multimodal LLM. It cannot generate text. We suggest using a separate LLM for text generation.

**Does it support other languages?**

The model has some capacity for non-English languages due to data contamination in the training data, but it likely won't do well.

## Misuse and abuse ⚠️

This project provides a high-quality speech generation model for research and educational purposes. While we encourage responsible and ethical use, we **explicitly prohibit** the following:

- **Impersonation or Fraud**: Do not use this model to generate speech that mimics real individuals without their explicit consent.
- **Misinformation or Deception**: Do not use this model to create deceptive or misleading content, such as fake news or fraudulent calls.
- **Illegal or Harmful Activities**: Do not use this model for any illegal, harmful, or malicious purposes.

By using this model, you agree to comply with all applicable laws and ethical guidelines. We are **not responsible** for any misuse, and we strongly condemn unethical applications of this technology.

---

## Authors
Johan Schalkwyk, Ankit Kumar, Dan Lyth, Sefik Emre Eskimez, Zack Hodari, Cinjon Resnick, Ramon Sanabria, Raven Jiang, and the Sesame team.
